---
title: Free will
created: '2022/02/01'
edited: '2022/04/27'
layout: ../../../../layouts/BlogLayout.astro
---
# You are not free

**Edit: I am currently in an internal debate if I can get more out of compatibilism than I initially attributed
to it. Most philosophers are compatibilists, and I think this alone is a strong indicator that there is more
to the concept than I currently understand. I am also just a bad hobby philosopher**<br/><br/>
Let me start out with a disclaimer:
If you are easily disturbed by philosophical concepts
that might influence your day-to-day life,
I would advise you to skip this article.
This is not meant to say that this article is life changing.
However, these ideas can be unpleasant.
I am speaking from experience.
Ten years ago, I was first introduced to the illusion
of free will. But only recently have I accepted the conclusion from
this debate. I am no longer worried by its implication, but
you might be and this is enough of a reason to stop reading.
There is a right time in one's life to come across these ideas and if
you are not feeling ready, feel free to skip. Also take everything
I write with a grain of salt. I am fallible and do
not have any high grounds on this debate. If you are
extra nice, contact me and tell me about my reasoning flaws.
This way I can improve my writing and thinking.
The topic of free will is complicated and there are
many aspects to it which I might not have considered
or I am not even aware of (you know the unknown unknowns <a href="#references">[2]</a>).

This discussion is heavily influence by
<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j4Oyi1T-HmU">Rationality Rules</a>
, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OwaXqep-bpk">CosmicSkeptic</a>
and the Free Will book by Sam Harris.
With that being said, let's jump right into it.

## Definition

Free will is not really easy to define and your version
might slightly differ from mine. But so that we have a clear ground for elaboration
my definition goes as follows:
**Free will is the ability to have acted differently in a given situation.**
This is still pretty vague, but it provides some good ground for further distinctions.
What I mean by 'to have acted differently' is that if you make a decision in a situation
and then rewind time and space, so that you relive the moment without any knowledge
of your future
self then you have the ability to decide differently. Even though it is the exact
same situation with the universe in the exact same spot (atoms, particles...).

## My framework for evaluating free will

My stance is derived from the naturalistic viewpoint.
Which is roughly that there are known forces that
rule our lives like atoms, particles and the interaction of those.
We are part of the system and not outside of it so
we are also bound to physical laws and not exempt from them.
The chain of causality is an important concept of this
elaboration as well. I do not consider ideas like a soul or
other unknown forces that might be the source of your free will.
Even though I agree with Sam Harris on the point that
the soul would in no way proof free will.
Moreover, there is no evidence for a soul, and therefore I don't think
it is too relevant for this discussion. Of course this argument
is a clever cop out because what you can not prove nor disprove
is an easy position to take. This version is often used by religious people
as such they try to mitigate the evidence against free will.
This position might be described as "God gave us free will because he is
gracious, and thus we do have free will".
This argument depends on different preconditions.
First you would have to prove that there is a god and second that she/he/it gave
us free will to begin with. The mere presence of a god is no argument for free will.

## The problem with the meaning of free will

The concept of free will is a difficult one to grasp if you
rationally think about it. We take it for granted that
we have free will and that we are the agents of our decisions.
This intuition runs deeply. Even though I do intellectually
understand that I do not have free will, I am living like I do
have a free will, because my brain is so accustomed to this idea.
However, if you think about what the concept of free will entails,
namely that there is something inside you that is not in the
realm of causality makes the concept deeply flawed.
Where does this agency come from if it is not part of the
physical world, because if your will is derived from your brain and it's
composition which acts based on physical laws, then where does this
agency originates from? Further, if such an entity would exist
what is the origin of it? What is the source of a rational brain that
can make choices independent of the physical world?
The concept is hard to grasp because true free will is
not really imaginable in our current world.

## The origin of your will

My previous point touches on the problem of the source of free will.
If you brain is just composed of atoms acting on each other and
behaving according to physical laws without some other source
of agency then there can not be any free will. As stated, religions evade
this problem with the concept of the soul, but I am not even
remotely convinced by this concept. Because it is not falsifiable
meaning that it can never be disproved.
But where does your will come from? Why do you make decisions?
It all boils down to desire. You decide based on your desires.
You might think this a spectacular simplification of life,
but think about any decision you made in the recent past.
They are all based on your desires.
Let's look at an example:
You go and get some ice cream with your friends,
now the person serving you the ice cream asks you what you would like.
You think: "I really like chocolate, but I also like strawberry".
Then you choose chocolate because it suits you best in this situation.
Where does this choice come from? It is based on your desires.
Maybe you decided because in your childhood you loved chocolate ice cream.
Further you might be inclined to sweeter ice cream because your
taste buds are especially receptive to sweeter ice cream.
In any case you decision did not come
out of thin air, it is based on your desire that you have formed at some previous
time in your life and which might have originated long before you were aware
that you prefer chocolate. What I try to bring across here is that decisions
are based on desires and you did never actively "choose" these desires.
Your mind persuades you that this was a free decision and you are the agent
of this decision, but where does this freedom come from?
I would like to circle back with this example to the definition of free will.
If we rewind time and space such that you are in the exact same spot
with exact the same constellation of your brain cells composed of the same
atoms. Even the universe is in the same state as in the original situation.
Do you really think that you could "choose" strawberry, do you think
you can uphold the physical world based on some concepts of an
invisible force we are not aware of yet that might give you the
ability to choose? Every day our brain tricks us into thinking that
we could have chosen differently, but imagining alternate versions of
the future is no proof of a free will. It just means your brain
is weighing different options. The "self" is nothing more than
a really complex machine that still is bound to the physical laws.
Now you might say hold on for a second, choosing ice cream is not
really something important. I make a deliberate decision if I
weigh different options in complex situation, so that means
I exercise my free will. This is a good point, but again
you're weighing a decision is just you trying to maximize your
desires. These desires were never chosen by "you" and even
if you have the feeling that at some point you did choose
to like something, it is based on some previous desire or
predisposition that you did not choose. We are not autonomous
agents that are not bound by physical laws, it is just
that our brains are good at persuading us that
we do have a free will, and it is "us" who is making
the decisions. Now you might say: "Fine, but at least
I chose my desires, and I am evaluating those frequently,
and it is 'I' who decides what desires to choose".
This is a good objection, but did you really choose
these desires? You might like chocolate because when you first
tried it you were really receptive to the taste overall.
But just because you have genes that make you receptive to
chocolate ice does not mean that you choose this desire.
Of course, reality is a lot more complex with
different factors influencing you. But none of
these decisions come from an independent agent.

## Determinism

So if we do not have free will, what is driving our actions?
The answer might not be satisfactory for most people,
but it is highly likely that our actions are just
part of a chain of causality. Determinism is the name of
the concept that I have discussed in the previous paragraphs.
It might be deeply unsettling at first. But don't worry I will
come back to this important point later on.
However, the world is not truly deterministic, because physics
has taught us a thing or two about randomness. So, reality is a lot more
complicated than saying we are only part of a chain of deterministic
events. Yet, I will continue to use determinism. But now you know
that nothing is truly deterministic.
Now that we have discovered that randomness has a role to play,
does it save the notion of free will?

## Randomness does not rescue free will

Now you might argue that free will is saved by randomness,
because if there is randomness we are not able to predict the
future from the current state. Sorry to disappoint, but
why should randomness indicate free will? If something is
truly random you are not the agent of this randomness, there
is no actual will in something that is random.
Let's make a really simplistic example:
Again you have to decide between two sorts of ice cream.
This time you are already sure that you want to have
chocolate, but somehow a random event inside your brain cells
on the particle level occurs which leads you to choose
strawberry. How can you use randomness here to defend free will?
Randomness does not originate from an independent agent.
"You" (whatever that even means) did not "choose"
strawberry. Randomness is no defense for free will.

But maybe the concept of compatibilism which
tries to reconcile free will and determinism can
save us?

## My problem with compatibilism

A lot of prominent people have resorted to the concept of
compatibilism - e.g. Daniel Dennett. Which in essence means that determinism
and free will are compatible.
Wikipedia states that "[C]ompatilists often define an instance of "free will"
as one in which the agent had freedom to act according to their own motivation.
That is, the agent was not coerced or restrained."<a href="#references">[1]</a>
For me this concept sounds like a cop out. Yes, we might weigh different
options and decide based on our motivations, but this does not solve the problem
that we never chose our desires or motivations in the first place.
This is just a redefinition of free will. A watered down version
of the concept of libertarian free will.
In my opinion it is a concept to preserve the notion of
free will, because philosophers are also just humans who might not want to
deal with the unsettling idea of determinism.
Our rationality does not prove that we have free will,
weighing different options is not the slightest evidence for free will.
Now a personal observation from watching discussions on free will
and the proponents thereof (this is probably heavily biased):
Every time someone tries to explain compatibilism it sounds
like they are weaseling around the concept of free will and
provide different analogies what compatibilism entails.
It often sounds as a romanticized version of free will
that makes us feel better, but it does not really
rescue free will.

## Difference between fatalism and determinism

Oftentimes people misunderstand these two concepts.
Fatalism means that your future is predefined and that we could predict the future
if we had all relevant informations (and probably computing power.
Further we would need to solve the problem that the simulation is part of the simulation
- we would try to simulate the universe even though the simulation device is
also part of the simulation that it is trying to simulate - YEY).
But determinism does not state any of this. It just says that the present state is
defined through the past.
This is a really important distinction.

Furthermore, one concept that is
heavily crushing down on fatalism is true randomness.
Fatalism and randomness
can not both be true. Because true randomness is obviously not predictable.
Yet, quantum physic states that true randomness is indeed
a reality.
However, I don't think this distinction is really that important.

## Practicality of free will

So, you might be inclined to say: "Yeah, we don't have free will, but
where is the actual practicality in such philosophical discussions?
How does it translate into my life?"
It might be argued that there is no practical lesson in discarding free will
and that we are just complex machines drifting through life.
End of story. But even though determinism might sound horrifying, I want
to propose an alternative way of embracing determinism.
During our daily lives we live as though we have free will.
This is nothing world shattering, as this is just our default
brain state. It would be extraordinary difficult to remind ourselves
that we have no free will. Further, it would probably be
discouraging and tedious. Now comes the interesting part.
We can use determinism to be more forgiving and patient.
People are not acting on their own free will, they are
just acting. This is liberating as you can use it during difficult
conversations to remind yourself that the person sitting in front of you
could not have acted differently. As long as people don't use it
as an excuse to do whatever they want it is a nice tool in your
mind shelf. Of course, there must be a limit for your patience and
forgiveness. Don't let people make excuses without changing their behavior.
But the concept of determinism can help you to handle difficult situations.
To summarize, act as if you have free will, but remember that other people
do not have free will, and you can behave more emphatically towards their mistakes.

## Further discussions

There are many topics which I can not elaborate on.
Maybe in another life, but I want to give some food for thoughts.
How does the acceptance of absence of free will compare to our current
justice system (including prisons and psychological institutions)?
How does it impact other public fields?
Should we teach children the concept of free will and determinism?
Can free will be rescued through unexpected findings or deeper understanding
of the human brain?

<h1 id="references">Reference list</h1>

[1] <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compatibilism">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compatibilism</a><br/>
[2] <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/There_are_known_knowns">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/There_are_known_knowns</a>
